multi-homing, docs: provide multi-homing user documentation (#3378)
ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes: docs/multi-homing.md

to that particular network.

## Configuring secondary networks
To allow pods to have multiple network interfaces, the user must provide the
configurations specifying how to connect to these networks; these
configurations are defined in a CRD named `NetworkAttachmentDefinition`.

Below you will find example attachment configurations for each of the current
topologies OVN-K allows for secondary networks.

**NOTE**: currently, all the secondary networks **only** allow for east/west
traffic.

### Routed - layer 3 - topology
This topology is a simplification of the topology for the cluster default
network - but without egress.

There is a logical switch per node - each with a different subnet - and a
router interconnecting all the logical switches.

The following net-attach-def configures the attachment to a routed secondary
network.

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: l3-network
  namespace: left-one
spec:
  config: |2
    {
            "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
            "name": "l3-network",
            "type": "ovn-k8s-cni-overlay",
            "topology":"layer3",

>             "subnets": "10.128.0.0/16/24",

Reviewer: indicate this support multiple subnets that is comma-separated?

Author: Done.

            "mtu": 1300,

>             "netAttachDefName": "left-one/l3-network"

Reviewer: indicate this must be in the form of "namespace/name"?

Author: Done.

    }
```

### Switched - layer 2 - topology
This topology interconnects the workloads via a cluster-wide logical switch.

The following net-attach-def configures the attachment to a layer 2 secondary
network.

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: not-so-fast-network
  namespace: left-one
spec:
  config: |2
    {
            "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
            "name": "not-so-fast-network",
            "type": "ovn-k8s-cni-overlay",
            "topology":"layer2",
            "subnets": "10.128.0.0/24",
            "mtu": 1300,
            "netAttachDefName": "left-one/not-so-fast-network"
    }
```

## Pod configuration
The user must specify the secondary network attachments via the
`k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks` annotation.

The following example provisions a pod with two secondary attachments, one for
each of the attachment configurations presented in
[Configuring secondary networks](#configuring-secondary-networks).

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  annotations:

>     k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: l3-network,not-so-fast-network

Reviewer: indicate we don't support the same NAD configured multiple times on the same Pod?

Reviewer: probably we should also mention that update the k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks annotation is not supported.

Author: Done both.

# Multi-homing
A K8s pod with more than one network interface is said to be multi-homed. The
[Network Plumbing Working Group](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multi-net-spec)
has put forward a [standard](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multi-net-spec)
describing how to specify the configurations for additional network interfaces.

There are several delegating plugins or meta-plugins (Multus, Genie) implementing this standard.

After a pod is scheduled on a particular Kubernetes node, kubelet will invoke
the delegating plugin to prepare the pod for networking. This meta-plugin will
then invoke the CNI responsible for setting up the pod's default cluster
network, and afterwards it iterates the list of additional attachments on the

> pod (yes, these plugins **must** be able to access the Kubernetes API...),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pod,
```

This additional note does not seem necessary. The "yes" is answering a question I never had

Author: Done.

invoking the corresponding delegate CNI implementing the logic to attach the pod
to that particular network.

## Configuring secondary networks
To allow pods to have multiple network interfaces, the user must provide the
configurations specifying how to connect to these networks; these
configurations are defined in a CRD named `NetworkAttachmentDefinition`.

Below you will find example attachment configurations for each of the current
topologies OVN-K allows for secondary networks.

**NOTE**: currently, all the secondary networks **only** allow for east/west
traffic.

### Routed - layer 3 - topology
This topology is a simplification of the topology for the cluster default
network - but without egress.

There is a logical switch per node - each with a different subnet - and a
router interconnecting all the logical switches.

The following net-attach-def configures the attachment to a routed secondary
network.

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: l3-network

>   namespace: left-one

Reviewer 2: Where's the right one?

Author: Renamed it to `ns1`.

Hope it's OK. If not, please propose another name.

spec:
  config: |2
    {
            "cniVersion": "0.3.1",

>             "name": "l3-network",

Reviewer 2: Is this a must? I recall in some newer versions of the CNI spec this became redundant, with Multus using the NAD name. I may be wrong though.

Author: Yes, multus defaults this to the `net-attach-def.Metadata.Name` when it is not provided.

Good catch.

Author: Actually, spoke too soon: multus does it, but ovn-k requires it.

If I try to consume a net-attach-def without this parameter, I get the following error: 
```
W0127 11:00:26.332185      75 network_attach_def_controller.go:350] net-attach-def ns1/l2-network is first seen and is invalid: error parsing Netw
ork Attachment Definition ns1/l2-network: invalid name in in secondary network netconf ()
```

I'll add the name back, and open an issue about this.

            "type": "ovn-k8s-cni-overlay",
            "topology":"layer3",
            "subnets": "10.128.0.0/16/24",
            "mtu": 1300,
            "netAttachDefName": "left-one/l3-network"
    }
```

**NOTE**

> - the `netAttachDefName` parameter **must** be in <namespace>/<net-attach-def name> format

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the `netAttachDefName` parameter **must** be matching <namespace>/<net-attach-def name> of the surrounding object
```

Reading about "format" it was not at first obvious to me that it must be the same as the metadata of this object. I was thinking about arbitrary namespace and name written in this format.

Author: Done.

- the `subnets` attribute is a comma separated list of subnets.
- the `subnets` attribute indicates both the subnet across the cluster, and per node.
  The example above means you have a /16 subnet for the network, but each **node** has
  a /24 subnet.

### Switched - layer 2 - topology
This topology interconnects the workloads via a cluster-wide logical switch.

The following net-attach-def configures the attachment to a layer 2 secondary
network.

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:

>   name: not-so-fast-network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  name: l2-network
```

We don't know how fast it is. It is not obvious what are you comparing it to.

Author: Done.

  namespace: left-one
spec:
  config: |2
    {
            "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
            "name": "not-so-fast-network",
            "type": "ovn-k8s-cni-overlay",
            "topology":"layer2",

>             "subnets": "10.128.0.0/24",

Reviewer 2: How does a list of subnets work here? Would be Pods within the network given IPs from random not overlapping subnets?

Author: Random ? That word throws me off; they would get IPs from the subnets defined by the user.

Reviewer 2: If I request two subnets here, and then request this NAD from a Pod, what IP (from which subnet) gets assigned to the Pod?

Author: one of each ?

Reviewer 2: Aha! It was not clear to me that the Pod will get a IP from each of the listed subnets. My assumption was that they somehow join into one big subnet, that's why I was confused.

Could you mentioned in the docs what's the behavior with multiple subnets listed?

Author: ```bash
kubectl exec -nns1 tinypod -- ip a
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host 
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: eth0@if17: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1400 qdisc noqueue state UP group default 
    link/ether 0a:58:0a:f4:00:07 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.244.0.7/24 brd 10.244.0.255 scope global eth0
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::858:aff:fef4:7/64 scope link 
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
3: net1@if18: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1300 qdisc noqueue state UP group default 
    link/ether 0a:58:0a:80:00:03 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.128.0.3/24 brd 10.128.0.255 scope global net1
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::858:aff:fe80:3/64 scope link 
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
4: net2@if19: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1300 qdisc noqueue state UP group default 
    link/ether 0a:58:0a:80:00:01 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.128.0.1/24 brd 10.128.0.255 scope global net2
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet 192.168.200.1/24 brd 192.168.200.255 scope global net2
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::858:aff:fe80:1/64 scope link 
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever

```

Author: > Aha! It was not clear to me that the Pod will get a IP from each of the listed subnets. My assumption was that they somehow join into one big subnet, that's why I was confused.
> 
> Could you mentioned in the docs what's the behavior with multiple subnets listed?

Done.

Reviewer 3: thanks I didn't know this either :)

            "mtu": 1300,
            "netAttachDefName": "left-one/not-so-fast-network"
    }
```

## Pod configuration
The user must specify the secondary network attachments via the
`k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks` annotation.

The following example provisions a pod with two secondary attachments, one for
each of the attachment configurations presented in
[Configuring secondary networks](#configuring-secondary-networks).

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: l3-network,not-so-fast-network
  name: tinypod
  namespace: left-one
spec:
  containers:
  - args:
    - pause
    image: k8s.gcr.io/e2e-test-images/agnhost:2.36
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
    name: agnhost-container
```
## Limitations
OVN-K currently does **not** support:
- the same attachment configured multiple times in the same pod - i.e.
  `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: l3-network,l3-network` is invalid.

> - updates to the network selection elements lists - i.e. `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks` annotation

Reviewer 2: Is this about hot-plug?

Author: and more than that; if you change the interface name / MTU / ... of an existing attachment, don't expect that do trickle down to the actual pod interface.

Reviewer 2: I see. What if I change the annotation and then kill the Pod. Would it start again with the new configuration or no?

Author: if you kill the pod, the pod stays dead. 

But, iiuc your scenario, since this configuration is passed via CNI_ADD (which is sent when instantiating the sandbox), this updated configuration would be applied to your new pod.

The following net-attach-def configures the attachment to a layer 2 secondary
network.

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: l2-network
  namespace: ns1
spec:
  config: |2
    {
            "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
            "name": "l2-network",
            "type": "ovn-k8s-cni-overlay",
            "topology":"layer2",
            "subnets": "10.100.200.0/24",
            "mtu": 1300,
            "netAttachDefName": "ns1/l2-network"
    }
```

## Pod configuration
The user must specify the secondary network attachments via the
`k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks` annotation.

The following example provisions a pod with two secondary attachments, one for
each of the attachment configurations presented in
[Configuring secondary networks](#configuring-secondary-networks).

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: l3-network,l2-network
  name: tinypod
  namespace: ns1
spec:
  containers:
  - args:
    - pause
    image: k8s.gcr.io/e2e-test-images/agnhost:2.36
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
    name: agnhost-container
```

> ## Limitations

Reviewer 2: Can I request a specific IP using the `networks` annotation or is it not supported yet?

Author: the OVN-K secondary networks do **not** invoke the IPAM plugin, as such, no one will act upon the requested attachment IP afaict.

So no.
